---
title: Migration to v4
parent: Migrations
nav_order: 3
---

# Migration to v4

This guide will help you migrate from v3 (or lower) to v4. 

Here is a **list of all changes** if you want to migrate from v3 (or lower) to v4:

## Intervals don't immediately start on mount anymore

Since v4, intervals won't start immediately on mount anymore.

With the recent introduction of **interval controls** (start/stop, pause/resume etc.),
all looping hooks could be started manually, but they were still starting immediately on
mount like before. Since this is often undesired, all of these hooks (except for the clock)
won't start on mount anymore. At least not by default. It can still be enabled via an option, though.

### Examples

Intervals can be started via the returned `start` callback.
Just call it upon a button click or inside a `useEffect`.

```javascript
const { start } = useInterval(doSomething, 200)
```

Starting the interval manually is **probably the best idea in most cases** –
however, if you really want an interval to start immediately on mount, **you can still do that** by using the new interval options (an additional argument for most hooks), where you can set `startOnMount` to `true`, like so:

```javascript
useInterval(doSomething, 200, { startOnMount: true })
```

This breaking change affects:

- `useInterval()`
- `useCounter()`
- `useTimer()`
- `useCountdown()`

```javascript
// APIs for the affected hooks
const { start } = useInterval(doSomething, 200, { startOnMount: false })
const [value, { start }] = useCounter({ start: 1, interval: 400, stepSize: 2, startOnMount: false })
const [value, { start }] = useTimer(0, { startOnMount: false })
const [value, { start }] = useCountdown(10, 0, { startOnMount: false })
```

## `useCountdown()` now has a mandatory end parameter

The countdown hook is now a bit more than just a backwards-timer. It has now a
mandatory end-parameter and will automatically stop when it's reached. 
Additionally, an event callback will be fired when this happens (see examples below).

### Examples

```typescript jsx
// BEFORE:
// In v3 and below this would have counted down to infinity (or until it's manually stopped)
const [counter] = useCountdown(10)

// AFTER:
// Since v4 this will count down to 0 and then stop by itself
const [counter] = useCountdown(10, 0)
```

To be notified when the countdown ends, you have to provide a callback to `options.onEnd()`.

```typescript jsx
// This will print a message when the countdown hits 0
const [counter, { start }] = useCountdown(10, 0, { 
    onEnd: () => console.log('Countdown has reached zero!')
})
```

## The return value of `useTimer()` has changed

To be aligned with all the other interval hooks like `useInterval()`, `useCounter()`, and `useCountdown()`,
`useTimer()` now supports **interval controls** (like start, stop, pause etc.), too.

This means instead of…

```javascript
const timerValue = useTimer(0)
```

…you now have to write:

```javascript
const [timerValue] = useTimer(0)
```

The benefit is that you can now pause and resume a timer like so:

```javascript
const [timerValue, { pause, resume, isPaused }] = useTimer(0)

return <button onClick={isPaused ? resume : pause}>
  Toggle timer
</button>
```

## Timeouts spawned by `useTimeout` will not be debounced anymore

Previously, timeouts spawned by `useTimeout()` were automatically debounced.
This is **not the case anymore**. If you want to debounce your callbacks, there is now 
a dedicated hook for it, called **`useDebounce()`**

### Examples

Take a look at the following example:

```typescript jsx
import { useState } from 'react'
import { useTimeout } from 'react-timing-hooks'

const HelloWorld = () => {
  const [output, setOutput] = useState(null)
  const onButtonClick = useTimeout(() => console.log('clicked'), 1000)

  return <div>
    <button onClick={onButtonClick}>Click me!</button>
    <p>{output}</p>
  </div>
}
```

If you were to click this button more than once in less than a second, `clicked` would've appeared only once in your console.
At least in v3 that was the case. Now you would see it as often as you clicked – every callback is executed.

However, it is often desired – especially for user input – to have it "debounced". For this there is now
a dedicated hook which is called `useDebounce()`.

This new hook does not function _exactly_ the same as the old `useTimeout()` hook though, because it **fires immediately** 
and _then_ blocks consecutive executions until the timeout expires. If you want the callback to fire **after** the timeout,
you have to set the flag `options.fireAfterTimeout = true`.

```typescript jsx
import { useState } from 'react'
import { useDebounce } from 'react-timing-hooks'

const HelloWorld = () => {
  const [output, setOutput] = useState(null)
  const onButtonClick = useDebounce(() => console.log('clicked'), 1000)

  return <div>
    <button onClick={onButtonClick}>Click me!</button>
    <p>{output}</p>
  </div>
}
```
